=head1 WHY CALL IT MARPA? or BLATANT PLUG

This translator is named after the great Tibetan translator, Marpa.
At Marpa's time (the 11th century A.D.), Indian Buddhism was at its
height, and a generation of Tibetans translators were devoting
themselves to obtaining its texts and translating them from Sanskrit.
Marpa was their major figure, so much so that today he is known as
Marpa Lotsawa, or "Marpa the Translator".

In those days, the job of translator was not for the indoors type.
"Translation" required studying with the Buddhist teachers who had
the texts and could explain them.  That meant travel from Tibet to
India.  From Marpa's home in the Lhotrak Valley, the easiest way
to reach India was 15,000 foot Khala Chela Pass.  Even to reach
Khala Chela's relatively easy, three-mile high summit, Marpa had
to cross two hundred miles of Tibet, most of them difficult and all
of them lawless.  From Khala Chela downhill to the great Buddhist
center of Nalanda University was four hundred miles, but Tibetans
would stop for years or months in Nepal, getting used to the low
altitudes.

Tibetans had learned the hard way not to go straight to Nalanda.
Almost no germs live in the cold, thin air of Tibet, and Tibetans
arriving directly in the lowlands had no immunities.  Whole expeditions
had died from disease within weeks of arrival on the hot plains.

Marpa plays a significant role in my novel, B<The God Proof>, which
centers around Kurt GE<ouml>del's proof of God's existence.  Yes,
I<that> Kurt GE<ouml>del, and yes, he really did worked out a God
Proof (it's in his I<Collected Works>, Vol. 3, pp. 403-404).  B<The
God Proof> is available at Amazon:
L<http://www.amazon.com/God-Proof-Jeffrey-Kegler/dp/1434807355>.

