=head1 NAME

Parse::Marpa::BIBLIOGRAPHY - A Marpa Bibliography

=head1 Aho and Ullman 1972

I<The Theory of Parsing, Translation and Compiling, Volume I: Parsing>
by Alfred Aho and Jeffrey Ullman
(Prentice-Hall: Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1972).
I think this was the 
standard source for Earley's algorithm for decades.
It certainly was B<my> standard source.
The account of Earley's algorithm is on pages 320-330.

=head1 Aycock and Horspool 2002

Marpa is based on and derived from
the parser described in John Aycock and R.
Nigel Horspool's "Practical Earley Parsing", I<The Computer Journal>,
Vol. 45, No. 6, 2002, pp. 620-630.
I take the idea that LR(0)
precomputation can be done for
L<Earley's general parsing algorithm|"Earley 1970">, as well as the details of
how to do it, from Aycock and Horspool.

The Aycock and Horspool paper is
L<available on the web|http://www.cs.uvic.ca/~nigelh/Publications/PracticalEarleyParsing.pdf>, unlike
L<"Earley 1970">,
and summarizes Earley's very nicely.
It is B<not>, however, easy reading.
I have been following
this particular topic on and off for years.
Nonetheless I found this paper very heavy going.

=head1 Earley 1970

Jay Earley's most accessible paper on his algorithm.
is "An efficient context-free parsing algorithm",
I<Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery>,
13:2:94-102, 1970.

Ordinarily, I'd not bother picking at nits in a brilliant and
historically important article that's over 35 years old.
But not a few people cite this article as not just the first word in Earley
parsing, but the last.
They need to be aware of two issues.

First, the parse engine itself, as described, has a serious bug.
There's an easy fix, but one that greatly slows down an algorithm
whose main problem, in its original form, was speed.
The whole matter is well laid out by
Aycock and Horspool
L<in their article|"Aycock and Horspool 2002">.

Second,
according to Tomita there is a mistake in the parse
tree representation.
See the bibliography entry for this article in L<"Grune and Jacobs 2008">.
In the printed edition, it's on page 578,
and on the web
(L<ftp://ftp.cs.vu.nl/pub/dick/PTAPG_2nd_Edition/CompleteList.pdf>),
it's on pp. 583-584.
My methods for getting the parses
out of Earley sets
have come from
L<Aho and Ullman|/"Aho and Ullmann 1972">,
L<Aycock and Horspool|/"Aycock and Horspool 2002">,
and my own device,
so I am taking Tomita's word on this one.

=head1 Grune and Jacobs 1990

I<Parsing Techniques: A Practical Guide>,
by Dick Grune 
Ceriel Jacobs,
(Ellis Horwood Limited: Chichester, West Sussex, England,
1990).
This book is L<available on the Web|http://www.cs.vu.nl/~dick/PTAPG.html>

=head1 Grune and Jacobs 2008

I<Parsing Techniques: A Practical Guide>,
by Dick Grune 
Ceriel Jacobs,
2nd Edition.
(Springer: New York NY, 2008).

This is L<Grune and Jacobs 1990> updated.
The bibliography for this book is available in enlarged form
on the web: L<ftp://ftp.cs.vu.nl/pub/dick/PTAPG_2nd_Edition/CompleteList.pdf>.

=head1 Wikipedia

Wikipedia's article on Backus-Naur form is
L<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backus-Naur_form>.
It's a great place to start if you don't know the
basics of grammars and parsing.

As Wikipedia points out, 
BNF might better be called Panini-Backus Form.
The grammarian Panini
gave a precise description of Sanskirt
more than 23 centuries earlier in India
using a similar notation.
