=head1 NAME

Parse::Marpa::WHY - Why call this parser "Marpa"?

=head1 WHY CALL IT MARPA?

Marpa is the name of the greatest of the Tibetan "translators".  In
that time (we're talking the 11th century AD) Indian Buddhism was
at its height.  A generation of Tibetans translators were devoting
themselves to obtaining its texts and translating them from Sanskrit.
Marpa was their major figure, and today he is known simply as Marpa
Lotsawa: "Marpa the Translator".

In the 11th century, translation was not a job for the indoors type.
A translator needed to study with the Buddhist teachers who had the
texts and could explain them.  That meant going to India.  Marpa's
home was in the Lhotrak Valley, and from there the easiest way to
India was via the 15,000 foot Khala Chela Pass.  To reach Khala
Chela's three-mile high summit, Marpa had to cross two hundred miles
of Tibet, most of them difficult and all of them lawless.

From Khala Chela downhill to the great Buddhist center of Nalanda
University was four hundred miles, but Tibetans would stop for years
or months in Nepal, getting used to the low altitudes.  Almost no
germs live in the cold, thin air of Tibet, and Tibetans arriving
directly in the lowlands had no immunities.  Tibetans had learned
the hard way not to go straight to Nalanda.  Whole expeditions had
died from disease within weeks of arrival on the hot plains.

=head1 BLATANT PLUG

There's more about Marpa in my new novel, B<The God Proof>, in which
his studies, travels and adventures are a major subplot.  B<The God
Proof> centers around Kurt GE<ouml>del's proof of God's existence.
Yes, I<that> Kurt GE<ouml>del, and yes, he really did work out a
God Proof (it's in his I<Collected Works>, Vol. 3, pp. 403-404).
B<The God Proof> is available at Amazon:
L<http://www.amazon.com/God-Proof-Jeffrey-Kegler/dp/1434807355>.

